[WHOOSH]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>GEORGE NOORY: You are
an expert on the occult.
That gives you the impression
there's something bad there.
>>MITCH HOROWITZ: It all
depends on how you use it.
And there's a scale of ethics.
Where you fall on that scale
determines who you are.
>>NOORY: You have this ability
to concentrate on things,
prayer, manifestation.
>>HOROWITZ: I take a
radical approach to prayer.
Thought itself is
a tool of creation.
It's possible that
in our generation,
we may not need ritual
and ceremony anymore
to externalize thought.
The very understanding
that thought
is a creative force
may be enough for us
to help navigate and use it.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>GEORGE NOORY: And
welcome to "Beyond Belief."
Mitch Horowitz is our special
guest, one of today's most
literate voices of
the esoteric mysticism
and the occult. Mitch is
an award-winning historian
and a writer in residence at
the New York Public Library,
whose books include "A Cult
America," "One Simple Idea,"
and "The Miracle Club."
Mitch, welcome to the program.
>>MITCH HOROWITZ:
Thank you, George.
Great to be here.
>>NOORY: Now, what's it like to
be a resident at the New York
Public Library?
>>HOROWITZ: Well, right
now my residency is remote.
It's a beautiful building where
I had a wonderful workspace
and all kinds of
research privileges,
and that ended in February.
So today I am a remote
writer in residence.
>>NOORY: You are an
expert on the occult.
>>HOROWITZ: Yes, sir.
>>NOORY: How did
that start for you?
>>HOROWITZ: It really started
when I was a little kid, thanks
to public libraries.
When I was a kid
growing up in Queens,
I was fascinated with
folklore and superstition
and all kinds of esoterica.
I would take out
books on astrology
and Native American folklore
and all kinds of subjects
like that from the library,
and I never looked back once.
>>NOORY: You were like me.
I was hooked on
astral projection,
ghosts, all those things.
>>HOROWITZ: I'll never forget.
One day, my sister brought home
from school a Carlos Castaneda
paperback, and I was hooked.
I never looked back.
>>NOORY: That was it.
>>HOROWITZ: Yes.
>>NOORY: A lot of people
hear the word the occult,
and they think it's
dark and bad and evil.
It's really not, is it?
>>HOROWITZ: No, it isn't.
It comes from the
Latin word occultus.
It means secret or hidden.
It's a word that came into
usage during the Renaissance,
when Renaissance writers and
thinkers were rediscovering
the spiritual
traditions of antiquity,
from Egypt, Greece, Rome, and
they referred to these things
as the occult.
>>NOORY: There's a song by
Frank Sinatra that deals
with that old black magic.
>>HOROWITZ: Yes.
>>NOORY: What is black magic?
>>HOROWITZ: Well,
traditionally speaking,
people see black magic as
being something selfish,
something done exclusively for
the self rather than something
beneficent or for others.
But in this day and age, I
don't make any distinction
between white and black magic.
>>NOORY: Like a spell
or curse for somebody.
>>HOROWITZ: A spell or a curse.
I do require in my own practice
ethics and reciprocity.
I do believe that
we're all connected.
But as far as reaching for
something for yourself,
as far as reaching
for attainment,
I don't see that as bad.
I don't see that as black magic.
As long as you're not
doing any kind of violence
to another person.
>>NOORY: When the Indiana
Jones movies pop out,
it surrounds the occult.
That gives you the impression
there's something bad there.
>>HOROWITZ: It does
give you the impression,
but the truth is the occult is
like any other human vehicle,
whether it's debt spending,
or whether it's drugs,
or what have you, it all
depends on how you use it.
I often say that in terms of the
human psyche, there's empathy,
and there's spite.
And where a person
falls on that scale
is going to determine how they
use the tools in their lives.
>>NOORY: Why do they call
it black magic, Mitch?
>>HOROWITZ: I think that black
magic is a designation that's
probably outdated
in our own times,
but it was a
designation that was
used to talk about
magicians who were
casting spells or
manipulating people or curses
or things like that.
To me, there's just magic.
And there's a scale of ethics.
Where you fall on that scale
determines who you are.
>>NOORY: Didn't you
just go to Egypt?
>>HOROWITZ: Yes, I did.
I was in Egypt last year.
I'm working on a documentary
about an occult book called
"The Kybalion," which
was published in 1908.
It's a collection of
Greek, Egyptian wisdom
or an interpretation
of that wisdom.
It's a mysterious, wonderful,
very powerful book.
And this documentary
that we're working on
gets to the roots of
where the book comes from,
and that entailed
going to Egypt.
So we did some of our shooting
in Egypt early last year.
The movie will be out
probably in early 2021.
>>NOORY: It was a
worthwhile trip?
>>HOROWITZ: Enormously so.
Enormously so.
Tough to film and
to shoot in Egypt.
Tough to get around in Egypt and
get the things done that you--
>>NOORY: Because of permission?
>>HOROWITZ: Because
of permission.
It's very expensive, and truth
be told, we did some of it
in a sort of pirated fashion.
We couldn't afford--
>>NOORY: Kind of hid
the camera a little bit.
>>HOROWITZ: Exactly.
[LAUGHS]
>>NOORY: Stuff like that.
>>HOROWITZ: And
that's not something
you want to get caught doing.
But we went there with
a purpose in mind.
We couldn't always
afford the licensure.
And we did everything
that we were able to do.
It was a wonderful trip.
We met wonderful people.
And some really mysterious
things happened.
And the whole story
appears in the documentary.
>>NOORY: My late father
was born in Cairo,
so he used to talk about Egypt.
He left when he was six to
come to the United States.
>>HOROWITZ: I
wondered about that.
>>NOORY: But he
felt it was magical.
>>HOROWITZ: Oh, it's
a magnificent city.
It's a chaotic city.
It's a magnificent city.
I mean, in many respects,
Egypt is the birthplace
of primordial civilization.
It's the most magical
place on Earth.
>>NOORY: Do you think
it's much older than what
science is telling us?
>>HOROWITZ: I really,
truly believe that it is.
And this is something that
I've explored recently.
There are two Egyptologists who
you've probably interviewed,
John Anthony West
and Robert Shoch.
And they theorized
going back to the 1980s
that the oldest portions
of the Great Sphinx
showed water damage.
And they estimated that
timeline of ancient Egypt
went back older than, say, 3,500
BC, maybe as old as 10,000 BC.
And I think we've seen
enough corroboration
to take that thesis
very, very seriously.
But it hasn't been studied
in the last generation.
This is what I was
referencing earlier.
It's very difficult to
get the proper licensure
and other things in Egypt.
So that scent trail
has gone cold,
and I hope it gets
picked up again.
>>NOORY: Interesting
take on that.
Egypt is kind of
surprising and puzzling.
They have many gods.
>>HOROWITZ: Yes.
>>NOORY: What do they
have so many for?
>>HOROWITZ: Well, you could
look at it in different ways.
We live under many
laws and forces,
and our ancient
ancestors were, I think,
more intimately connected
to nature in certain ways
than we are.
And they personified or
defied certain energies,
and they worshiped them.
They sought
relationships with them,
whether it's Horus or
Seth or Osiris or Isis.
And they felt that there was a
natural and invisible correlate
to everything that we
experience in life,
and that you can
seek a relationship
with that invisible correlate,
which you could even personify.
>>NOORY: Do you
have a favorite god?
>>HOROWITZ: I do.
>>NOORY: Which one?
>>HOROWITZ: And
that is the god Set,
who is the god of
storms and the desert.
And--
>>NOORY: Spell it.
>>HOROWITZ: S-E-T. Set.
>>NOORY: Set.
>>HOROWITZ: S-E-T.
>>NOORY: OK.
>>HOROWITZ: And that
is a god with whom
I feel a very deep
personal relationship.
>>NOORY: And what is that god?
>>HOROWITZ: He is the god
of storms, of the desert.
Sometimes he's seen as the
god of the dark side, which
is the rap that I
will get occasionally.
But again, I don't make a
distinction between dark side
and light side.
I make a distinction
between empathy and spite.
I make a distinction based on
reciprocity, based on ethics.
He's a god of great power.
He's a god of great usurpation.
And I love him, and I seek
a relationship with him.
That's my personal path.
>>NOORY: Well, I've
always known you to be
a very outstanding person.
>>HOROWITZ: Thank you.
>>NOORY: And even though you
may dabble on the dark side,
I don't see you as being bad
or evil or anything like that.
>>HOROWITZ: I really
believe that there
are gods that represent
rebelliousness, upending,
revolution, anti-heroism,
and I really
identify with those gods.
But that doesn't mean
that I take some sort
of a go-it-alone approach.
I care very deeply about
honor, nobility, ethics,
protecting other people, valor.
I would never do something
to hurt another person that
wasn't in self-defense.
>>NOORY: Do you dabble
in astrology, Mitch?
>>HOROWITZ: Oh, quite a bit.
>>NOORY: You do?
>>HOROWITZ: Quite a bit.
>>NOORY: And how has that
led you down your path?
>>HOROWITZ: I take
astrology very seriously.
I believe in the astrology
that was practiced
by figures like Carl Jung and
Henry Miller and D.H. Lawrence.
All these figures believed
that as the stars are aligned
at your time of birth, your
basic natal chart provides
a thumbprint of character.
I have personally found
that to be the case.
I can't speak exactly to how
that works, what the delivery
system is, but there
are so many correlations
between physical life
on Earth and the cosmos
that it would be
foolish to write off
that there's a correlation
between the human mood,
the human psyche,
and the positioning
of the celestial objects
at our time of birth.
It affects so much in
other areas of life.
>>NOORY: Years ago, I had
a guest on our program,
Art Rosengarten, who's
an expert in Tarot cards.
And he swears by these things.
How about you?
>>HOROWITZ: I take Tarot
cards very seriously.
I believe that it is
entirely possible that when
you are using a pictogramatic
device like Tarot,
you may be taking a
snapshot of the present,
and a kind of
interdimensional snapshot,
where you're getting a
sense of everything that's
going on at once.
And Tarot may, in fact,
give you a picture
of past, present, future,
frozen for that moment in time.
It's almost like
a kind of Polaroid
shot of what's happening
at that moment.
>>NOORY: Mitch, on the newest
season of Gaia's "Mystery
Teachings," Dr. Theresa Bullard
explains how the Tarot cards
can lead to self-discovery.
>>THERESA BULLARD: In this
season of Mystery Teachings,
we embark on a journey
of self-discovery
and transformation
through the 22 archetypes
of our multidimensional self.
So a big part of this journey
is about helping us to,
one, recognize our
multidimensionality.
To recognize how these
22 archetypes play
in our own life,
but also how they
play in the life of our
higher self that has these 22
different parallel lives.
Well, what do we mean
by parallel lives?
Well, the idea goes
back to our true self
as being something that
is beyond this hologram
of this physical universe.
So if we were to
think of our true self
as being beyond the hologram,
beyond the quantum sea,
in a place metaphysically that
we call the great central sun.
From that place
of our true self,
there are 22 archetypal rays or
aspects of that true self that
are sent out through
the universe,
and they go to
different planets,
so each one becomes like a
being on a different planet.
And then from those
different places
where our true self
emanates out to,
it then reflects those
rays and those energies
back to all the other
22 planets again.
So we have one of those
planets is here on Earth,
but we could also be out
in the Sirius system.
We could be out in the Pleiades.
You know, we could be having
various aspects of ourself
in 22 different planets.
And then from those
places, those 22 archetypes
get reflected back
here to Earth.
And our higher self that has
its emanations here on Earth
then has 22 archetypes also
being emanated down to Earth
and incarnating.
So when we say
parallel lives, it's
like we have 22 different
aspects of our higher
self living out these lives
here on Earth in parallel
with each other, but they're
either on slightly different
frequencies, or they're
just different people
who are having a life under a
different archetypal influence.
>>NOORY: Well, Dr. Bullard
makes a lot of sense there,
doesn't she?
>>HOROWITZ: Yes, she does.
I like the points
that she's making,
because I agree that the
major trumps of the Tarot deck
are an archetypal language.
They're recognizable
to everybody,
from every different
culture, walk of life,
and I would even
say time period.
If you set the clock back
300 years, for example,
and you had a Tarot deck,
and you showed these images
to somebody in the
Polynesian Islands
or somebody in Central Russia
or someone in the South Pacific,
every person to whom
you showed these things
would recognize those images.
The devil, the king, the
lovers, the magician.
These are true
archetypal images.
It is a real language
of the psyche.
>>NOORY: That's pretty dramatic.
You've got a new book
out on Manly P. Hall.
>>HOROWITZ: Yes.
>>NOORY: Who was he?
>>HOROWITZ: Manly P. Hall
was a great occult scholar.
He was sort of the dean
of American esoterica.
He was born in Canada, but
grew up in the American West.
Spent most of his life
living and working
in the city of Los Angeles,
until his death in 1990.
And he is famous for writing
probably the greatest
underground book
in human history,
and that is "The Secret
Teachings of All Ages."
It is a massive encyclopedia
of the occult, esoterica,
symbolism.
It came out in 1928.
And I have a new book
out called "The Seekers
Guide to the Secret
Teachings of All Ages,"
where I explore some
of Manly's themes.
But it is a book that you
will lose yourself in,
and you will find yourself in.
People open that book, and
they find a path in life.
It's just endless in
its possibilities.
>>NOORY: Is it an instructional
manual, basically?
>>HOROWITZ: It's not really
an instructional manual,
but it's a catalog.
It's a beautifully
curated catalog
of esoteric and
occult traditions
from all throughout the ages.
And you open this book, and
you find chapters on Tarot,
on Pythagorean
mathematics, on Atlantis,
on Egyptian mystery traditions,
and you find yourself in it.
You find something
you gravitate towards.
>>NOORY: He had an effect
on some well-known people.
And we're going to go
through some of these names,
and I want you to explain
what kind of indelible effect
he had on their lives.
The first, of course, the
late President Ronald Reagan.
>>HOROWITZ: That's right.
I've been writing about
this for 10 years.
I found evidence that Reagan and
Hall were not only acquainted,
but Reagan was using
certain of Hall's phrases
and ideas and terminology
in his speeches.
>>NOORY: Wow.
>>HOROWITZ: Yes.
Going back to the
1950s, the very dawn
of Reagan's political career,
up through his presidency.
>>NOORY: Well?
>>HOROWITZ: [LAUGHS]
Right, exactly.
And I did a text analysis.
I've written about this
in "The Washington Post"
and a lot of other places.
There's no question about it.
Reagan was borrowing
ideas from Manly P. Hall.
>>NOORY: Somebody who
I would never thought
would have had some of Manly
P. Hall's ideas, the late Osama
bin Laden.
>>HOROWITZ: Can you believe it?
Yes.
There--
>>NOORY: How was
that discovered?
>>HOROWITZ: Military
intelligence
after bin Laden was
killed found a copy
of "The Secret Teachings of All
Ages" on bin Laden's bookshelf.
>>NOORY: Wow.
>>HOROWITZ: And you
would ask yourself,
what is this book doing there
on bin Laden's bookshelf?
Bin Laden and his
movement harbor a lot
of conspiracy theories
about Freemasonry
and different secret societies.
And they think there are
these hidden hands that
are kind of pulling the
strings in the world.
And Manly wrote
about some of that
in "The Secret
Teachings of All Ages,"
but not in a negative
way, not in the way
that Osama bin Laden
might have understood it.
He saw Freemasonry, for
example, as an organization that
believed in principles
of individual liberty,
ecumenism, religious
freedom, and did believe--
I think correctly-- that
masonry played a core role
in the founding of our nation,
but not in a negative way,
not in the way that bin Laden
would have interpreted it.
>>NOORY: Right, exactly.
What did he say about
secret societies?
>>HOROWITZ: You know,
his secret society thesis
is really, really fascinating.
Manly took a basically positive
view of secret societies,
like the Freemasons--
>>NOORY: Unlike now, where
everybody thinks there's
something negative going on.
>>HOROWITZ: Everybody thinks
there's something negative.
But I would say
take a second look.
Take a second look.
Groups like Freemasonry, the
Rosicrucians, the Historic
Illuminati, all these groups
revolved around the idea
that the individual
spiritual search was
the birthright of all people.
They wanted to separate
power from the aristocracy.
They wanted a separation
of church and state.
They believed that
the individual
had a birthright
to search according
to his or her own lights.
Manly believed that
these secret societies
vouchsafed ancient ideas
and eventually helped
bring them to light in the
founding of the United States.
It is a fact that an inordinate
number of our founders,
including Washington and Ben
Franklin, were Freemasons.
>>NOORY: Absolutely.
>>HOROWITZ: And this runs
throughout our history.
Historians,
mainstream historians,
are only just now coming
to recognize this.
But Manly was writing about this
in the early 20th century, when
it was not widely acknowledged.
>>NOORY: How did
Manly get so tuned in?
>>HOROWITZ: That is a real
question for the ages.
Because he published "The
Secret Teachings of All Ages"
when he was only 27 years old.
>>NOORY: God, how
could a 27-year-old
get that kind of experience?
>>HOROWITZ: Isn't it something?
You can't get most 27-year-olds
to leave their room now,
to turn off Xbox.
And Manly created--
>>NOORY: Right.
It's also that dangerous
age with all those rock
stars that died.
27, 27, 27.
>>HOROWITZ: 27.
And he peaked.
He peaked very, very young.
He created one of the
really extraordinary works
of esoteric wisdom of all
time at a very young age.
And it can justly
be called a mystery.
He didn't have a
traditional education.
He was raised by his grandmother
in the American West.
He never had any
formal schooling
but for he was in a military
academy in New York City,
just for maybe 18
months or so, otherwise
had no formal schooling.
The question of how Manly
accomplished what he did
is not an ordinary question.
There's a mystery there.
>>NOORY: Absolutely.
Let's look at some
images, Mitch,
and have you explain
what we're looking at.
The first would be
"Gnostic Pathos One."
What is this?
>>HOROWITZ: Ah.
Is the Gnostic God
Abraxas, who was worshipped
by different sects in
the Mediterranean Basin
in the decades following
the death of Christ.
It's a combination of man
and beast, a combination
of higher and lower.
You'll see the serpents for
feet, of course the cock's head
in the place of the human head.
It's the idea like the centaur.
It's the idea of combining
the energies of both
the animalistic and the
intellectual together into one
being.
>>NOORY: Let's look
at the next image
and see what we have here.
Go ahead.
>>HOROWITZ: Ah.
The Nordic Tree of
Life, Yggdrasil.
This is a wonderful
image that runs
throughout Nordic mythology
in which there is thought
to be a great cosmic
tree that holds up
the underworld, our world,
Middle Earth, and the heavens.
And this cosmic tree-- and this
will sound familiar to many
of your viewers--
has a serpent wrapped
around it, a serpent
of wisdom, a serpent that
can ensnare you and hurt you,
or a serpent that
can enlighten you.
So you find the
idea of the serpent
runs through all religious
traditions around the world.
>>NOORY: Who created
these graphics, Mitch?
>>HOROWITZ: These
graphics were created
by an artist named J.
Augustus Knapp, whose
work runs throughout "The
Secret Teachings of All Ages."
He had been a commercial
artist, a man largely involved
in the advertising
world, with the exception
of a novel that he illustrated.
And he wanted to get
into the esoteric,
and Manly said, come with me.
>>NOORY: Fascinating.
The next one is?
>>HOROWITZ: Ah, this is one
of the iterations of Mithra.
A lion, a man with
a lion's head.
This god, Mithra, was one
of the major, major gods
of the Persian world.
>>NOORY: They're
bowing down to him.
>>HOROWITZ: They're
He is a god who
controls creation.
He is holding up eight
stars which are considered
the eight energies of life.
Again, he too, you see,
is wrapped by a serpent.
We think of a serpent as evil
today in the modern West,
but many religious traditions,
including early Judaism,
saw a serpent as a
bestower of wisdom.
And Mithra was one of the major
religions of the Persian world.
The Roman Empire
encountered it and
incorporated Mithraic practices
into many of its own beliefs.
>>NOORY: And isn't the serpent
being used for medical symbols,
too?
>>HOROWITZ: The
serpent started getting
used as a medical symbol,
believe it or not,
in the First World War.
Because the serpent,
at that time,
was considered a symbol
of the god Mercury.
And it was considered a
symbol of safe passage.
And ambulances, American
ambulances, in the First World
War, would use a serpent as
a symbol of safe passage,
and it later became
associated with medicine.
>>NOORY: And this image.
What is this, Mitch?
>>HOROWITZ: Ah, this
is Hermes Trismegistus,
the thrice greatest Hermes.
This was the name
that the Greeks
gave to the Egyptian
God of Intellect, Thoth.
They called him three times
as great as our Hermes,
thrice greatest.
And they saw him as the giver of
wisdom, the giver of intellect,
the giver of writing.
And of course you'll see the
caduceus, the one with the two
serpents wrapped around
it, a wand of safe passage,
and a wand of wisdom.
>>NOORY: What's that
thing under his chin?
>>HOROWITZ: Oh,
well, he has a beard,
and he also has an ankh
hanging from his neck, which
is the Egyptian symbol of life.
You have a positive
and a negative and then
a reconciling, indicated by
the circle atop the ankh.
>>NOORY: Why would there be
a little picture of a dog?
>>HOROWITZ: Oh, that is
a wonderful question.
The Greeks saw dogs as
creatures of great loyalty.
And the Hebrew word
for dog is Caleb,
which is the name that
I gave to my older
son, which also means loyalty.
>>NOORY: And the
fire dragon seems
to be trying to blow
him up or something.
>>HOROWITZ: Yes.
That is supposed
to be Typhon, which
is considered the
Egyptian symbol of evil,
and he's mastering evil.
But seen in another
way, he's also
incorporating both positive
and negative forces.
>>NOORY: And the fact
that he's standing on top
of the creature tells you what?
>>HOROWITZ: Well,
it's interesting.
You'll see that that
same image later
got adopted into
our own guardian
image of Saint Michael, who
is often depicted as standing
on top of a serpent.
>>NOORY: Metaphysically
speaking,
what's the significance
of all these pictures?
>>HOROWITZ: These pictures
are really representations
of the human psyche.
We are a polarity.
We have all these different
tendencies in ourselves
that we're constantly
struggling in between.
And one of the great teachings
of ancient hermetic philosophy
or Greek Egyptian philosophy is
that your emotions, your moods,
are on a kind of sliding scale.
And if you're in a certain mood
that you want to get beyond,
by focusing on its opposite-- if
you can identify its opposite,
which is not always so easy--
by focusing on its opposite,
you can psychically
slide the scale.
We are creatures
of polarity, and we
can move along that polarity.
>>NOORY: Mitch,
over the years, I've
found you to be a
very upbeat person.
We get a lot of great
response on the radio program
when you're on.
I'm sure we're going to get a
lot with "Beyond Belief," here.
What is your 10-Day
Miracle Challenge?
>>HOROWITZ: Ah, The
10-Day Miracle Challenge
is a mental exercise.
It's an exercise in
mental metaphysics
to get something that
you urgently need
within a fixed period of time.
It's very simple.
You decide on the
thing that you need.
You make sure you're
absolutely passionate about it.
You write it down, and then you
make these 10 boxes, basically.
>>NOORY: Affirmations?
>>HOROWITZ: The 10
boxes represent 10 days
in which you focus on this.
You can use affirmations,
visualizations, prayers--
>>NOORY: Dreams.
>>HOROWITZ: Spells,
dreams, anything you want.
Your goal is to
focus on that thing
that you need within the
space of these 10 days.
And the key thing is, the
pivot point of the exercise
is this, watch
very, very carefully
for the arrival of the
thing you're looking for.
Because very often, miraculous
things enter our lives,
and we overlook them because
they come to us in ways that
are unexpected, that
don't fit our mind's eye
image, that seem too familiar,
and we close the door on them.
It's an exercise in being
very, very watchful,
and don't neglect
any possibilities.
Because miracles come in one
door and go out the other,
and we overlook them.
And this is a time, for these
10 days, to be very watchful.
>>NOORY: What do
you think is one
of the most important things we
should do to improve ourselves?
>>HOROWITZ: George, I believe
that the most important thing
a person can do to improve
him or herself is to determine
to get away from cruel people.
I don't think we talk about
this enough in our lives.
>>NOORY: Cruel being negative?
>>HOROWITZ: Cruel
being negative.
People who bully you.
People who run you down.
People who make diminishing
comments about you.
People who just make
you feel absolutely
constricted and afraid.
We don't talk enough about it.
>>NOORY: Always a problem.
>>HOROWITZ: We're always
being told-- it's a problem.
Therapists and ministers and
other folk would say, well,
you have to change yourself.
And yes, changing of
self is necessary.
But we wither.
We wither under the
influence of cruel people.
If you can't get away
from a cruel person,
make the inner vow that you
will separate from them within,
and you will get away from
them as a physical fact
at the first
possible opportunity.
But I see people's
lives just wither
under the influence of cruelty.
And it's vitally important to
get away from cruel people.
Your life will open up in ways
that you may never expect.
>>NOORY: You shut down
your Facebook page.
>>HOROWITZ: I did.
>>NOORY: How come?
>>HOROWITZ: I found too
much negativity on Facebook.
And I also found there wasn't
enough room for experimentation
on Facebook.
I don't believe that
our job as seekers
is just to repeat
whatever we've heard,
whatever has been passed down
to us through translations
of translations of
spiritual literature.
I want people to verify
everything for themselves.
I didn't find enough of a spirit
of experiment on Facebook.
I'm on Instagram and
Twitter, but I found
Facebook counterproductive.
>>NOORY: So far.
So far.
>>HOROWITZ: So far.
I'm liking it, so I
think I'll stick around.
>>NOORY: Are you a
believer in prayer, Mitch,
to get things done?
>>HOROWITZ: Absolutely.
Absolutely.
Not only am I a
believer in prayer,
but I take a radical
approach to prayer.
There is no wrong way to do it.
There is no wrong
way to approach it.
Some people say you
have to pray believing
that you've already received.
If a person abides by scripture,
you can look in scripture
and see that the matriarchs
and the patriarchs,
they prayed in
all kinds of ways.
They demanded things of God.
They got into fights with God.
There are all kinds
of ways to pray.
You can also pray to
a different deity,
as we were talking
about earlier.
You can forge a
relationship with any figure
from the pantheon
of ancient gods
that you feel some sympathy
with or affinity towards.
See what happens.
Experiment.
Be radical.
Be bold.
>>NOORY: Isn't there a biblical
saying, such it is written,
so it shall be?
>>HOROWITZ: So it is
written, so it shall be.
And I take very seriously
writing things down, actually.
I think that physically writing
down a prayer or an affirmation
is very important.
Not doing it just on a
tablet or on a computer,
but writing it down with an
old-fashioned pencil and paper.
Because--
>>NOORY: And just looking at it.
Reading it.
>>HOROWITZ: It's looking at it.
However small a step
that is, however
nascent a step that is, you
have, in some small way,
altered reality.
You've created something
physical and tactile
that wasn't there before.
>>NOORY: On the Gaia program,
"Rewired," Dr. Joe Dispenza
explains just how our
repetitive thoughts
can lead to the same actions
and same outcomes of our life.
>>JOE DISPENZA: What is change?
Let's assume that
your thoughts have
something to do with your
destiny or your future.
That you believe that your
thoughts create your life.
In the last episode,
I mentioned that you
think 60,000 to 70,000
thoughts in one day.
And 90% of those thoughts are
the same thoughts as the day
before.
So if you believe that your
thoughts have something
to do with your future,
and 90% of those thoughts
are exactly the same
as the day before,
and it makes sense then
your life or your future
isn't going to change very much.
Because the same thoughts
always lead to the same choices.
The same choices always
lead to the same behaviors.
The same behaviors create
the exact same experiences.
And the same experiences
produce the same emotions.
And those same emotions
begin to influence
your very same thoughts.
And everything in your
biology stays the same.
Your neural circuitry, your
neurochemistry, your hormones,
and even your gene expression
is equal to how you think,
how you act, and how you feel.
And how you think, how
you act, and how you feel
is called your personality.
And your personality
is intimately
connected to your life
or your personal reality.
Reason this with me.
There's a principle in
neuroscience called Hebb's Law.
And Hebb's Law says that
nerve cells that fire together
wire together.
So if you keep thinking
the same thoughts,
making the same
choices, demonstrating
the same behaviors, creating
the same experiences,
and producing the same feelings
and emotions for the last 10
years, it makes
sense then you're
going to begin to hardwire
your brain into a very
finite signature.
And that box in your brain, by
the time you're 35 years old,
becomes a very hardwired
set of programs that becomes
your identity or personality.
And that 35-year-old mark
means that most people,
by the time they
reach that age, become
a set of memorized behaviors.
Unconscious emotional reactions.
Automatic habits.
Hardwired attitudes, beliefs,
and perceptions that function
just like a computer program.
>>NOORY: I like Joe.
I like what he has to say.
>>HOROWITZ: Absolutely.
>>NOORY: He's spot on.
>>HOROWITZ: That
segment was magnificent.
That is our life.
And we know through brain scans
that repeat thoughts actually
alter the cellular
matter of our brain.
They alter the
pathways through which
electrical impulses, neural
impulses, travel in our brain.
This is absolute fact.
The challenge that
we face is how
to disrupt these
thought patterns,
these negative thought patterns.
And that's why I want people,
when they hear something,
not just to accept it, but
to work to verify everything
for themselves.
We have to experiment.
We have to do things that are
going to disrupt the familiar.
Everybody watches that
segment, and Joe just
articulated it beautifully.
All your viewers, like me, are
agreeing and saying, right on.
That's correct.
But how?
How do we disrupt these
habitual thoughts?
We have to come up with
ways of experimenting,
of challenging ourselves,
even of creating friction
in our lives in
order to challenge
these ordinary thought patterns.
>>NOORY: And by creating
this friction, what
does that do to us?
Does it tear us apart?
>>HOROWITZ: Sometimes
we may feel torn apart.
The Persian poet, Rumi, wrote,
pray for a tough instructor.
I think sometimes we
need to be torn apart.
Before we sat down together, we
were talking about bicycling.
I bicycle everywhere
in New York.
I bicycle in terrible weather.
I bicycle in near hurricanes.
I bicycle in blizzards.
I wear a helmet too.
But I try to do things
that will get me out
of the pattern of the familiar.
It can feel rough, but
we've got to disrupt
these repetitive thoughts.
We can't just agree with Joe--
which I do-- we have to
act on what Joe is saying.
>>NOORY: And if you do that,
does it change your life?
>>HOROWITZ: It has
changed my life.
I--
>>NOORY: I've always known
you to be upbeat, always.
>>HOROWITZ: [LAUGHS] I
have my moments, George.
I can assure you,
I have my moments
where I'm staring at the ceiling
at 4 o'clock in the morning.
>>NOORY: How do you pull
yourself out of that?
>>HOROWITZ: Well,
sometimes, first of all,
you have to realize that
there are negative thoughts
storms that you just
have to deal with.
Our psyches are
like the weather,
and things come and go, and we
cannot always struggle against
them.
But I would say you
have to throw yourself
into the unexpected.
And it can be uncomfortable,
and it can be difficult,
but if you take
the same actions,
your thoughts are
not going to change.
We want things to go
easy for ourselves.
We want to be warm.
We want to be comfortable.
We like the familiar.
But it's only by
disrupting the familiar
and sometimes putting
ourselves into a situation
that either feels scary
or difficult or physically
challenging or
that's just unusual.
Only through that can we push
back against repetitive thought
patterns.
>>NOORY: In spite of the fact
that you have this ability
to concentrate on things,
prayer, manifestation,
you still get involved in
things that can pull you down.
>>HOROWITZ: Oh,
without question.
>>NOORY: Is that
because you're human?
What causes that?
>>HOROWITZ: It's because we're
human, and we live in a world
that this is a tough
life, and things
are very difficult for people.
I mean, I understand why
people turn to the bottle.
I understand why
people turn to drugs.
I understand why people zone out
in front of the television set.
But it's just so
critically important
not to get lost in that.
Permit yourself some of that.
>>NOORY: But there's always
an upside, isn't there,
to be able to pull
yourself out of that.
>>HOROWITZ: If you can
pull yourself out of it,
you never know what will happen.
I always say to people, we all
acknowledge that our behaviors
can invite catastrophe.
Nobody questions that.
Those same behaviors can
also invite the miraculous
and invite the unexpected.
Take that dimension within
yourself very seriously.
>>NOORY: Mitch, what do
you think of meditation?
>>HOROWITZ: I
meditate twice a day.
I use transcendental
meditation, which
is a mantra-based
form of meditation.
>>NOORY: How long?
>>HOROWITZ: 20 minutes.
Just two 20-minute sessions.
It's super easy.
>>NOORY: Quiet?
>>HOROWITZ: Quiet.
It's relaxing.
It's a vital part of my life.
I've gone through phases
where I've stopped meditating.
I experiment with
different things.
I disrupt my practice.
I went through a period of
time where for about a year,
I wasn't meditating.
But the stress was too
great, and I went back to it.
>>NOORY: Are UFOs
part of the occult?
>>HOROWITZ: UFOs,
strictly speaking,
are not part of the
occult, but they open up
so many wonderful questions
into extra physicality,
interdimensionality, and
we are living in a time
right now where UFOs
have gone mainstream.
No serious person thinks
that cockpit videos of UFOs
are just some sort
of natural phenomena
that's being misunderstood.
It's engineered phenomena.
>>NOORY: Something's going on.
>>HOROWITZ:
Something's going on.
Where it is, where it
comes from, we do not know.
But when you open the
door to those questions,
if you take seriously the
interdimensional thesis,
which I do, you open up
the door to all kinds
of extra physical questions.
>>NOORY: What is "Kybalion"?
>>HOROWITZ: "Kybalion,"
we don't really
know what the word means.
The author never defined it.
It's probably a Greek
inflection of the word [GREEK]..
But "The Kybalion" is a work
that was published in 1908.
And it is basically
an interpretation
of Greek, Egyptian,
psychological, and spiritual
wisdom.
It's one of my favorite
books of all time.
One summer, I read it
five times in a row
and determined to make
this documentary about it.
>>NOORY: Neil Kramer, on Gaia's
"Open Minds," talked exactly
about that.
>>NEIL KRAMER: The polarization
principle in hermetism is
nicely and simply discussed in
this little book called "The
Kybalion," which was--
the origin of it is
mysterious, but we
think it was William Walker
Atkinson and Paul Foster
Case got together and
thought about this
and put this little book
of principles together.
And one of those
principles is polarity,
which is to say the world uses
this great positive negative
force of the solar
masculine creator
and the lunar female destroyer.
And those two forces pull at
both ends of the spectrum,
if you like.
And everything falls
into polarization
in that respect, love, hate,
courage, despair, whatever.
And the principle of it
is that polarization,
you have to map the negative and
know it in your heart and will
and mind.
You have to map the positive
in a similar fashion
to find the center point,
to find equilibrium.
And so you discover
this great secret
that there's no such
thing as hot or cold--
classic example--
there is temperature.
There's no such thing
as love and hate.
There is feeling.
And you cannot love
unless you hate it deeply.
If you want to
feel deeply, you've
got to be prepared for venom.
If you want to love completely
and unconditionally, you
need total separation, total
almost despondent isolation.
Total anarchy within oneself.
So if you want to feel, there
is no limit to those boundaries,
the positive and the negative.
And that's the
path of the human.
It doesn't have to be
violent in a manner that
is going to go against
somebody's informed consent.
It doesn't have to be ugly.
It can be a path, a shadow
mapping of great beauty,
like, say, HR Giger, the
artist, or Stockhausen,
with his incredible, bizarre
music in the '50s and '60s
or my favorite Swedish
death metal bands.
They're not just guys
playing the guitars
with a lot of distortion.
They're mapping shadow,
just like Byron and Shelley,
and Tennyson mapped
shadow in poetry.
So these musicians map
what is the shadow.
Why does it pull us?
How can we talk about it?
And sometimes you can't
always put words to it,
so we use a
paintbrush or a guitar
or food or sex, strange,
subversive, crazy sex,
to go to the hillside
under the full moon
and to give this ritual
emancipation, this ritual
liberation of self
through the sexual energy,
a sort of European
Kundalini type thing.
So there can be positive
shadow mappings.
And of course, there are
many light shadow mappings
in finding serenity,
peace, wholeness,
fruitfulness in one's life
to become a good householder,
to become a man of integrity,
to become a woman of substance,
whatever it is.
Those things show you that
this whole path is one thing.
There is no separate stuff.
It's all poles.
Everything is dual.
>>NOORY: Well, Neil seemed to
cover a lot of ground, Mitch,
in that one little
segment, didn't he?
>>HOROWITZ: It's a
perfect encapsulation
of "The Kybalion."
I think he put it beautifully.
The core teaching
of "The Kybalion,"
as he was referencing, is
that life is a polarity.
And there was a great spiritual
teacher, GI Gurdjieff,
who had a very
simple expression,
"every stick has two ends."
It's a simple expression,
but it opens up onto so much.
Those are our lives.
And a person can rest assured
that if something happens
to you that you think
is a misfortune,
is some kind of a
crisis, look very,
very carefully,
because you may be
delivered by that misfortune.
You may be delivered
by that crisis.
I have wished for things,
I have prayed for things,
and I have not gotten them,
and I look back later--
>>NOORY: Do you
question yourself?
>>HOROWITZ: I have
often found that when
I didn't get something, it was
the greatest thing that could
possibly have happened to me.
That if I had gotten
the very thing I wanted,
it might have closed me off
to another relationship,
to another opportunity.
Life is very mysterious, and we
move along this sliding scale.
And we can never be certain
what represents deliverance,
what represents destruction.
Don't wish too hard
for things to be easy.
Because I think we get
refined by friction,
and that's part of
this polarity of life.
>>NOORY: Well, remember
that saying too,
be careful what you wish for.
>>HOROWITZ: Oh, yes.
>>NOORY: It could come
back and haunt you.
>>HOROWITZ: Yes.
And I think we get a
lot of what we wish for,
and we're not aware of it.
And I think we're
very forgetful.
I think there are
these time intervals,
and sometimes
things that we might
have wanted when we were very
young come to us later in life,
and we regard them
as misfortunes.
But if we peel back the
layers of the onion,
we might find a correlation
between thought and event.
It's something to watch for.
>>NOORY: Mitch, where
does karma fit into this?
>>HOROWITZ: Well, I personally
think in terms of reciprocity
rather than karma, per se.
Because karma is such a
large, immense process.
It's very difficult
to understand
the cause and effect of life.
But I feel certain.
I feel certain more than
any other time in my life
that we are all
intimately connected.
There is a human wholeness.
And it stands to reason that
violence I do to another,
I'm doing to myself.
The law of reciprocity I think
is at the back of ethics.
I mean, that's the law by
which I attempt to live.
>>NOORY: Interesting.
And you do this practically
every day, don't you?
>>HOROWITZ: I make
every effort to.
And it doesn't necessarily mean
taking a sweetheart approach
to life all the time.
It just means understanding
there is an intimate connection
among us, and the way I
treat another is ultimately
the way I treat self.
>>NOORY: And you've
said in the past
that you might not need magic
or spellwork to live and exist.
>>HOROWITZ: Well,
one of the things
I wondered, maybe, maybe
in our age and generation,
we're learning enough about the
causative qualities of thought
to realize that thought
itself is a tool of creation,
a tool of instigation,
a tool of out picturing
whatever we're about
into the world, which
is exactly what we're trying
to accomplish with ritual
or ceremony or prayer.
And if we really
believe, and if we really
understand that
thought is a force,
it's possible that
in our generation,
we may not need ritual
and ceremony anymore
to externalize thought.
The very understanding
that thought
is a creative force
may be enough for us
to help navigate and use it.
>>NOORY: Let's go back to
Manly P. Hall for a moment.
If he saw of things that we're
doing today as societies,
what would he be saying?
>>HOROWITZ: Well, I think
Manly's concern towards the end
of his life was that
there was just a breakdown
in human civility, basically.
And he foresaw this before the
internet really came of age.
I find the common
use of sarcasm,
of rhetorical questions,
of diminishing comments
about other people, to be
an absolute poisonous smog.
It's the most destructive
element of human nature.
Sarcasm has its purpose.
Rhetorical questions
have their purpose.
But we can't make these things
into the common language
of everyday life, which
is what's happened online.
And I think we have to
get away from gossip,
hateful comments, sarcasm.
>>NOORY: The haters
are everywhere.
>>HOROWITZ: Haters
I challenge people.
Avoid that stuff for
one hour-- one hour--
and see if you don't
stand more fully tall.
Because the diminishment that
you bring to another person's
life, you are internalizing in
ways that you don't suspect.
>>NOORY: And let
me ask you this.
When you are practicing
this on a regular basis,
do you physically feel better?
>>HOROWITZ: I physically
feel better when I absolutely
desist from doing something
that humiliates or diminishes
another person.
And I am not saying that I take
a milquetoast approach to life.
I can get very
tough with people,
and I can criticize
people's careers and actions
and policies and do so with
a great deal of vitality
and energy.
But I will not attack, diminish,
demean, or humiliate the person
as a person.
And if you can avoid
this withering sarcasm,
if you can avoid making
insulting or diminishing
comments about another
person, you will stand taller,
and you will feel the
effects right away.
>>NOORY: And we're not talking
about joking and kidding
people.
>>HOROWITZ: Of
course, of course.
We don't have to walk around
eliminating sarcasm or irony
from our lives,
just don't make it
into the vocabulary
of hour-by-hour life.
>>NOORY: Mitch, how do
people get a hold of you,
your website, your books.
How do they find you?
>>HOROWITZ: My website
is MitchHorowitz.com.
I'm on Twitter, @MitchHorowitz.
Instagram, @MitchHorowitz23.
And people can find
all my latest books
on Amazon or any place
they buy their books.
>>NOORY: Thanks for
being on the program.
>>HOROWITZ: Pleasure
as always, George.
Thank you.
>>NOORY: It's always great
talking to Mitch Horowitz.
He's so upbeat.
When you deal with
the occult, you
don't know what you're going to
get, but with Mitch Horowitz,
you know you're going to be OK.
I'm George Noory, and thanks
for watching "Beyond Belief."
[MUSIC PLAYING]